Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Crute and Bill Vernon.
Practicing physicist Robert L. Forward is also a science fiction writer.
After writing science fact articles in the magazines for almost 20 years, Forward recently
published his first science fiction novel, Dragon's Egg.
When we asked Forward how he began writing science fiction, he claimed he was tricked
into doing it.
But the way I got into actually writing fiction was Larry Niven tricked me.
Here he explains how he innocently offered to help Larry Niven.
Larry Niven and Jerry Purnell were running a lecture series at UCLA.
Invited me to come and give a scientific talk on gravity as part of their series.
It was how science fiction and science interact.
And at the close of one of the sessions that Larry was talking on, he said he wanted to
write a story about beings that lived on a neutron star.
Frank Drake had mentioned this idea a number of years before him.
He said he really wanted to write that story.
And that night at the cocktail party that they threw, I said, Larry, I'll tell you what
I'll do.
I will work up all the scientific detail behind this story because I know a lot about neutron
star physics.
And it would be a fun story to read and I'd like to read hard science fiction.
And what I'd like to do is give you enough facts so that you can write a really hard
science fiction story without too many errors in it.
When Forward finished his part, Niven was still busy, so Forward continued the work himself.
And so I worked up all the science and gave him about 25, 30 pages of notes.
And he said, gee, I'm busy right now working with Jerry Pornell on something called Lucifer's
Hammer.
And I'm pretty busy.
I'll tell you what we'll do.
Why don't we just sort of make this a collaboration?
You may write the first draft of the story.
And then I'll take it over from there and rewrite the thing, because you're not a writer,
and I am, and that we will get the best of both worlds.
Well, so I went back and wrote the first draft.
And when I came back, he was still busy.
And so I ended up finding out that I wanted to read this story.
And the only way I could read that story was to write it first, so I had to write it.
And so Larry and Niven tricked me into getting into science fiction.
But Larry Niven didn't abandon forward after tricking him into writing a novel.
He advised forward on many aspects, including a major plot element.
Larry Niven basically gave the 1,000 to 1, I mean excuse me, the million to one time
difference.
And the main thing that he brought out was the fact that the important part of the story
was not all the science, which would have been in my tendency to write, but the problems
of how do you communicate with somebody that lives and dies a million times faster than
you do?
And if those beings, since they would be thinking a million times faster than you, would figure
out that you were there long before you could figure out they were there, and they had to
figure out a way to communicate with you and signal you that they were there before you
left.
And so he mentioned the fact that, for instance, one somebody on the neutron star would have
to climb a mountain and send a signal, and that might take them many generations.
Actually, in the story I compressed it into one generation basically.
But that was the kind of attitude that he brought toward the story that helped a lot.
More on Robert Ford tomorrow.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science
Fiction Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and David Cruz.
In our last show we learned how Robert Ford was tricked into writing the manuscript which
evolved into his novel, Dragon's Egg.
Larry Niven helped forward flesh out his ideas, but it was Lester Del Rey who helped him polish
the manuscript into a novel.
My very first draft, of course, was quite rough from a writing point of view.
And when Lester looked at it he saw some potential in it, but as it was, as the manuscript was sent to him,
it wasn't acceptable, it wasn't a book.
And he sat down and typed up 14 pages, single space, of detailed criticism of the manuscript.
And those 14 pages, when I followed them to the letter, and I don't think I disagreed with him on
but say one or two things.
When I went back to the manuscript and took his suggestions and then looked at the resultants,
it began to be readable instead of being a science fact article, I guess.
It had some flow, it had some characterization,
but it still was a hard science fiction novel.
In Dragon's Egg, Ford takes a hard science approach to a situation in which beings who inhabit a neutron star
learn of the humans who are orbiting their star, then establish communications with them.
The task is made difficult, though, by the fact that the aliens live at a pace roughly a million times faster than that of humans.
Thus an individual alien, or chila, lives out its entire life in several human minutes.
The chila, being native to a neutron star, with its intense gravitational and magnetic fields
and extremely dense matter, are certainly constructed different from humans.
Here Ford tells us about the aliens, their environment, and their names.
Once I had placed my imagination and myself on the surface of the neutron star,
now once I knew the territory well enough, and appreciated the fact that the light on this star comes from below, not above.
The sky is black, there's no light coming out of it except a few stars. Everything is a glow from below.
The territory is very flat because of the terrific gravity.
I began to sort of appreciate what it was like there.
What I basically did was take the Indian technique of naming children about things that occurred shortly after they were born,
and applied it to the chila, but put in a hyphen so it would take out the Indian context.
And also, of course, a lot of the Indian things like eagles and feathers and the sky and things like that don't exist,
so I had to do that transfer.
The chila's social structure differs from ours as well, though there are some similarities.
Soon I began to realize that in my dreaming up of these creatures, I'd end up with a social structure
that was sort of halfway between a Scottish clan and an Indian tribe,
and as if both the Indians and the Scottish were crocodiles that laid eggs instead of having the problems of mammals that they had to take care of their young.
The younger, immediately viable, crocodiles and turtles, and so are the little tiny chila.
So what I tried to do was imagine what it would be like if instead of monkeys developing intelligent social interactions, crocodiles developed intelligent social interactions.
Music
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
Music
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
Music
This is David Cruz and Bill Vernon. Although science fiction is a literature ostensibly about science, the effects of technology, or a future where science is very much present, or in some cases very much absent, it is mainly written by non-scientists.
Some writers do have undergraduate degrees in the sciences, Hull Anderson, Arthur C. Clark, Joe Haldeman and Charles Harness, to name a few, and certainly most other writers have had some coursework in the sciences.
But there are a few scientists who write science fiction. Practicing scientists who write it include Gregory Benford, John Slanzowski, Fred Hoyle, David Brinn and Tony Rothman, and a notable ex-scientist Isaac Asimov.
Another practicing scientist who writes science fiction is physicist Robert Ford, whose novel Dragon's Egg we have discussed previously. We asked forward what enjoyment he reaps from being a scientist and writing science fiction.
Writing is a process of selling science. I mean, I have always felt that part of my job as a scientist was to try and communicate, first the facts of science and second the excitement of science to the general public that is not involved in science.
Science is at the cutting edge of our intellectual achievements, whether it is physical sciences, chemical sciences, biological or social or whatever sciences. This is where we are developing as an intelligent being.
And we're learning more about the world around us and how we operate in that world. And it's very exciting to be involved in that. And you don't get much of many scientists admitting that it's exciting, but it is.
Part of the reasons you get professors working at wages less than they would if they were a plumber is it's more fun to be a scientist. But most of them are so hidebound and so concerned about their image that they don't want to admit that they're having fun.
Well, I admit I'm having fun being a scientist and I think it's fun. I think that's fun and the excitement and everything else can be communicated to the general public so that their awareness of the fact that they're part of an intellectual and evolutionary advance as an intelligent being can be given to them.
And I think that's one of the reasons why we have such a spurt of magazines today like Omni and Science 80 and the Smithsonian and others that have, and the Discovery. All of these magazines are beginning to realize that people want to be part of the leading edge of our cultural evolution.
And I found that I have the ability to communicate that. Now for many years I would only write science articles, not fiction. I wouldn't have a story. I just say here's something interesting I found at the outskirts of science and isn't it wonderful, isn't it great?
And I'd write it down to whatever level was there. And those were science speculation articles that I've sold in analog and Omni in places like that. And I finding that doing it in the form of fiction reaches more people.
Although Ford is becoming better known in the science fiction community because of Dragon's Egg, he has been in the field for many years writing science fact articles for the science fiction magazines.
Certainly science fiction benefits when people with not only the scientific background but the enthusiasm of Robert Ford contribute to it.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy. And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Aime and David Carson. One of the most unique of all science fiction novels is Norman Spinrad's The Iron Dream.
Though Spinrad did indeed write the book, he presents it as if it were written by Adolf Hitler.
Spinrad bases the book on a provocative supposition. Suppose Hitler, instead of leading the Nazi party to power in Germany, had come to this country and become a science fiction writer. What kind of books would he have written?
The Iron Dream is Spinrad's answer to that question. He wrote the book exactly as he believes Hitler would have.
Spinrad says it was a difficult book to write.
The book was a very difficult book to write. It was a very difficult book to write. It was a very difficult book to write.
It was a very difficult book to write. It was a very difficult book to write. It was a very difficult book to write. It was a very difficult book to write.
The book is a very difficult book to write. It was a very difficult book to write. It was a very difficult book to write.
Hitler's main character is Farrick Jagger, a sword and sorcery type hero.
Jagger fights to preserve the racial purity of humanity against hordes of genetically inferior mutants.
And in every way Spinrad tries to create a novel like Pulp Science Fiction Writer with Hitler's political and racial views and writing skills would have produced.
The book, of course, is a classic, anti-fascist novel. We asked Spinrad if anyone had ever completely misunderstood it and thought he was admiring Hitler.
No, the only kind of misunderstanding that I read in the review that I really got was a little bit different.
It was somebody who said, well, this is really well good fun, you know. I really enjoyed this book.
Why do you have to muck it up with all this stuff about Hitler and all the extraneous paraphernalia? It was just a good, you know, rousing adventure tale.
That is the only kind of misreading of the book that's really taken place.
I have not been calling off the Earthmashes by anyone that I know of in connection with that book.
Spinrad explains where the idea for such a unique experiment came from.
We're on the imbibus, came from a conversation with Mike Wilk on London where I was living at the time about how he wrote Sword and Sorcery and how he used Freudian imagery and the basic appeal of Sword and Sorcery.
And that gave me the idea that if Hitler had not become a Fuhrer of Germany, he could have as well winded up writing Sword and Sorcery.
And I've always been fascinated with the whole question of how a thing like Nazism could really happen.
And none of the stuff I had read about that really satisfied me, you know, political or economic or conventional explanations of how this happened.
And the two things came together and I, you know, had my insight about Nazism was that it was a psychosexual phenomenon that Hitler came to power by, in effect, manipulating imagery.
And psychosexual substructures rather than bio-coherent economic program and so forth.
And so that was the basis. And then, you know, this had a certain correlation with certain kinds of Sword and Sorcery and that was the basic evidence that generated the book.
The Iron Dream was published in 1972. It won the Pre-Apollo Award in France and was recently reissued in this country by Timescape Books.
And when it was first published in Germany not too long ago, it was banned. We'll have that story next time.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson and Daryl Lane.
Early in 1982, Norman Spenred's Science Fiction novel, The Iron Dream, was totally banned in Germany.
As we explained last time, the book is an anti-fascist novel. Though Spenred pretends the book was written by Adolf Hitler, it is actually a brilliant criticism of the political and racial views held by Hitler.
Spenred says the book has been well received in all the countries where it's been published.
This book has been published now in the United States, Britain, France, Japan, Spain, Portugal, Argentina, Italy, forget where else. About eight different countries.
It's been published in the other two Axis powers. It's been published in Argentina.
And it's been extensively reviewed in about eight different countries.
I have no instance where the book was misunderstood and was taken as anything but an anti-Nazi and anti-fascist novel throughout the world.
The German censor cited the book's danger to young people as one reason it was banned.
We asked Spenred if anyone could possibly misunderstand his intentions in The Iron Dream.
The book is written on two levels. The sophisticated readers understand what it is to begin with.
The other level is that the kind of people who are into things like Perry Rodin and that kind of proto-fascist science fantasy,
we start off reading the book, maybe identifying with Farrick Jagger, a third of the way into it, and suddenly realizing what it is they're identifying with.
So it becomes a kind of deprogramming experience for the kind of people that they claim would be harmed.
I think it would be a very strongly anti-Nazi book precisely for those kinds of young people who might have leanings in that direction because they would then be confronted with what it is that they're really identifying with.
We also asked Spenred what his reaction to the ban was.
Now that it's banned, obviously I feel that the book says it all. The book itself is in a way about why it was banned.
Because it's the same sort of mentality that goes around banning books that resulted in a different kind of way in the Third Reich.
It's not to say that old Germans are like this because the publisher has fought this all the way and is continuing to find it.
Most of the German newspapers, there's been a lot of coverage, is supported the book against the ban.
The German chapter of World SF had a vote and issued a public statement against the ban in supporting the book.
So I think it's a very retrogressive thing and it says something about I suppose the German political and social system is that they do not understand the concept that is embodied in the First Amendment to the Constitution of the United States.
And it's a particularly pernicious law because anything can be banned under this law or under the ground that it's not fit for children, even if it's not intended for children.
Which is exactly the kind of thing that the moral majority is trying to do here. Which tells you what kind of people they are too.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Thank you.